# Benchmarks for the TOP500 comparison

The benchmarks for the TOP500 comparison were carried out on Fedora 34
installed on a cheap tablet computer running an Intel Celeron N4000
processor, a high-end business laptop with an Intel i7-10610U
processor, and a Raspberry Pi 4 minicomputer.

The tests were all run using the [High Performance Linux (HPL)
package](https://www.netlib.org/benchmark/hpl/), which benchmarks
computers by a typical numerical problem: solving systems of linear
equations. This test is naturally heavy in linear algebra, placing
stress on the importance of having good linear algebra (math)
libraries.

The Fedora package of HPL, compiled against the MPICH library, was
used (hpl-mpich).  Since Fedora 33, all programs using linear algebra
are compiled against the [FlexiBLAS wrapper
library](https://www.mpi-magdeburg.mpg.de/projects/flexiblas). The
default implementation to use for basic linear algebra subprograms
(BLAS) or linear algebra package (LAPACK) calls is
[OpenBLAS](https://github.com/xianyi/OpenBLAS). OpenBLAS is known to
be very fast, and extremely competitive to vendor libraries. It is
also supports several processor architectures; in addition to the x86
and x86-64 families, also the arm, power and sparc architectures are
supported, for instance. Because the default variant of OpenBLAS is
the OpenMP-parallel version, for simplicity the hpl program was run
only with a single MPI thread. 4 OpenMP threads were allowed on the i7
and Raspberry Pi 4; 2 threads were used on the Celeron.

The benchmark is tied to the problem size of the linear algebra
problem *Ax=b*. If the problem size is too small, the measured
performance is terrible, since all the time is spent in
latencies. Increasing the problem size, the measured performance may
increase by orders of magnitude.

Because we are interested only in the order of magnitude instead of
painstaking tunings for improvements of some percentages, we chose to
collect our results with problem sizes that correspond to roughly 75%
of the computer's memory capacity: the Celeron has 3 GB of RAM, the i7
has 16 GB, and the Raspberry Pi 4 has 8 GB. For convenience, we
limited the problem size to 3 GB on both the Celeron and Raspberry Pi
4, whereas a 10 GB problem size limit was used on the i7.

A variety of problem sizes were considered ranging up to the memory
limit. As discussed above, the measured performance increases with
problem size, but features a wide plateau where changes in the problem
size or the division used in the solution approach do not markedly
affect the measured performance. We extracted values that correspond
to this plateau, as the performance plateau can be thought of as a
good representation of the average performance of the computer.
Indeed, the order-of-magnitude speed difference between the Raspberry
Pi 4 and the i7 computer was also anecdotally observed with test
calculations using the Fedora package of Psi4. Calculations run on the
Raspberry Pi 4 computer took almost ten times more time than on the
i7. (The morale here is to not buy cheap laptop computers, because by
investing 1.5x - 2x more you can get a laptop computer that is 10x
faster in everyday operations.)
